All right. Well, if we ask you any dumb questions or one that you don't feel
comfortable with or you don't like your answer, just tell us and we'll start it
over, okay? Oh, all right. Okay.
The first Wizard of Oz book, The Wizard of Oz, came out in 1900. How old was
Frank Baum then? He was 44 years old at that time. Had he done any other fiction
before he started on the Wizard series or the Oz series? Well, he had out
several other books before then. His first book was a book on how to raise
chickens in 1886, the book of the Hamburgs. But his most famous books were for
children, and he had a book out in 1897 called Mother Goose in Prose. And then
in 1899, he had out one that proved very popular, successful, called Father
Goose, His Book. And in the same year he brought out The Wizard of Oz, in 1900,
he had three other books at the same time. What kind of audience was Baum aiming
for when he wrote the Oz books? Well, he had young sons at the time that he
supposedly told the stories to, and I suppose children become temporary with his
own children. I don't know quite what audience, because the books have a wide
appeal to people of all ages. But probably he was aiming at children 10, 12,
along there. In reading the books, I see it on two levels. My five-year-old
daughter enjoys the witches and the magic and the cute characters, and I enjoy
the puns and that sort of thing. I was wondering if anybody knows how much
effort he put into the upper level versus the lower level, the children's level.
No, I don't know how much he put into it. Apparently he wrote fairly
effortlessly, though. I have seen only one of his manuscripts. It happened to be
the one for Glinda of Oz, and it's an amazingly clean manuscript. Very few
corrections in it or anything. And he wrote in longhand first, and then he typed
the manuscript later, and that's when he made whatever editing he had. But it
seemed just to come quite easily to him. Are his manuscripts and other personal
memorabilia collected anywhere? Well, there are not many of them that are in
existence. If they were, they would indeed be a collector's item.
At the end of the sixth book, The Emerald City of Oz, Baum apparently wanted to
stop because he sealed off Oz, and then the seventh one appeared. Was he serious
about wanting to call it off at number six? Apparently he was. He felt he had
written maybe enough about Oz that he was getting typed as an author. And while
he was very proud to be associated with Oz, he felt it was very successful. He
did want to write many other things. And so he thought that was the best way to
end it. Was there truly a landslide of letters and telegrams to him that made
him want to go ahead and write some more? Apparently there were a lot of
letters. And publishers received letters also. He did write two other books that
weren't about Oz after he wrote the sixth book. And they were not as successful.
And children still asked for more about Oz. So two or three years later, he
returned to Oz. In the forwards to the books, he mentions that the children
wrote and suggested this or that. Are those apocryphal stories, or are those
pretty much true? I really don't know. I suspect that, from what I know about
him, that the books are entirely his own. Of course, everyone gets inspiration
from some source or other. But I have an idea that, as a careful writer, the
books are largely his own creation.
Were they a financial success for him? Did he become independently wealthy for
them? Well, he certainly made a living from them. Well, he was able to build a
comfortable home in Hollywood. And after his death, his widow lived in it for
the rest of her days. And the house stood, I believe, until about 1954. But it's
no longer there now. But anyway, yes, he made a good living from them.
The last novel that he wrote, Glenda of Oz, was number 14. And it was
copyrighted in 1920. When did he die? 1919? Yes, he died in 1919. At the time he
died, he had been sick for about a year, a year and a half. And he had a couple
of manuscripts completed ahead so that they could be published even after he had
died. Did he leave any notes or diaries or anything about other stories that he
had planned to write? That's a tradition that he did, but no one's ever found
any. There was one brief little chapter of a book that may have been by him, but
some accepted as by him. I'm inclined to. Others are doubtful if it really was
his. And the reason I'm inclined to accept it is because it was about the magic
lake south of the Emerald City. And Baum had written about almost everything on
the Oz map except that. And I don't know how perceptive anyone else would have
been to write about that very lake he hadn't written about before. But at any
rate, it was the first chapter of a story. It's impossible to tell how it would
have developed from the one little chapter.
Since Baum wrote his 14 novels, there have been a number of other novels
written. How many have been written here up until now? Well, nowadays there are
40 books in the series, which means there would be 26 in the series after that
one. But there are other Oz books besides the ones in the official series. How
soon after Baum's death did people start writing novels, picking up where he
left off? Apparently right away. I have visited the publisher, and they had a
novel, a manuscript novel, that they had received and liked very much. But they
had already had a contract with another author to continue the series. So there
seems to be some evidence that the other authors had ideas of continuing the
series from the beginning.
This question is probably kind of hard to answer. Do the subsequent works more
or less maintain the same quality? Are they successful on the adult level and
the child's level as successful as Baum's original works were? Probably. Well,
here's where you get into rather subjective feelings about them. And it's
difficult to give a definitive answer on this. But each author wrote somewhat
differently about Oz. As a child, I accepted all of the books and enjoyed them.
But as an adult, I can see differences between the way the authors wrote. And
there are people who will not read any book except Baum's. And then there's
others that will accept this author, that author, and are choosy that way. But
the authors often wrote just for the children and didn't attempt to write on
quite so many levels. Though there are strange things in the other books. By
that I mean on different levels. All the level of meaning terms in them, of
course. But Baum seemed to be more successful at that than the others were
consistently.
Okay. I'm having a little bit of trouble hearing you now. We're having some
stormy weather here. If you could talk just a little louder, let's see if that
works. Okay. All right. Have there been any serious academic studies of, say,
comparisons of Baum's work with subsequent works, theses, dissertations, that
sort of thing? Well, yes, there have been. I know of one person who wrote a
doctoral dissertation on Baum's books. And the person is now a professor of
English. There have been many essays written about the Oz books. And, as a
matter of fact, a book of them being gathered together will come out this fall.
But just how many there are, I couldn't tell you.
The Oz idea has...
Well, there have been a lot of plays and movies and cartoons and such that have
been inspired by the Oz idea. They invariably changed the script or changed the
script is changed from the major works. Why is that? Why doesn't somebody do the
Wizard of Oz as it was written? Something like that. Why do they feel compelled
to change it? Well, I suppose it's to fit the drama into what they can work
with. It sometimes is quite difficult to fit in certain characteristics of the
different magic and so on. For instance, in the stage play of 1902 and 1903,
that period of time, Dorothy's dog Toto didn't appear in it at all. Instead,
they had a calf for a pet. An actor could play the part of a calf, whereas an
actor as a dog would have a difficult time, especially a tiny dog. It just seems
to be necessary to do it to make the dramatization. They've almost all done it.
Did that play appear on Broadway? Yes. It started in Chicago in 1902, but early
in 1903, it moved to Broadway. And it ran there in one theater or another for a
number of years, four or five years or more. And then for many years after that,
there were road shows of it. So apparently it's quite a successful play. It
seemed to be. Have there been any more plays based on it? I guess The Wiz was.
Has there been anything else? The Wiz was based on it, and The Wiz was fairly
close to the book. Yes, there have been plays, a good many plays put on about
The Wizard of Oz. Occasionally, someone dramatizes one of the other books. But
that doesn't happen very often. The Wizard of Oz is overwhelmingly the best
known, of course. It's my understanding that, is it the Disney Studios that
bought the rights to all of Baum's works, or all of his Oz works? They have the
rights to, as I understand, to great many of the Baum's Oz books. Of course, MGM
had the right to The Wizard of Oz. But I believe the Disney Studios has the
rights to all the others, other Baum's Oz books. And apparently they are working
on an Oz film at the present time. Why have the Oz works stayed so popular? They
were apparently popular when they first came out. They're still popular today.
Why for 80-whatever years? Why have they maintained their popularity? What is in
them that is so universally appealing? Well, apparently something is in them
that's universally appealing. I guess the idea of a little girl seeking home
strikes a response in court to some people. And, of course, the search for
wisdom, courage, kindness are certain noble ideals. And a humbug wizard and so
on also was attractive. But there's just something about them that strikes a
certain response to some kind of people. And it's difficult to explain what it
is. As a matter of fact, if you ask six different people, you'd probably get six
different answers. Different ones will not even agree on which book they prefer
of the ones they've read. But it much depends on the circumstances under which
you read the book, I suppose.
Another gentleman that was apparently quite important to the series was John R.
Neal, whom I have heard was called the Imperial Illustrator of Oz. How did he
get hooked up with the series? And has any artist ever equaled his work for the
Oz series? Well, the publishers asked him to illustrate the second Oz book. And
after that, they liked his work and asked him to illustrate the others. He was a
young artist in Philadelphia at the time and had illustrated things there and
other books even. But he was just starting his career in 1904 when the second Oz
book came out. And he became very closely associated with Oz. As many persons
think of the characters, he drew them rather than as any other artist drew them.
And, of course, eventually he wrote three books as well as illustrated them.
Between 1904 and 1942, he illustrated all of the Oz books that came out, which
is quite a span of years.
We were just talking that the books did have universal appeal. And, of course,
the reason we're talking to you is because you're associated with the
International Wizard of Oz Club. Tell us a little bit about that organization,
how large it is, what kinds of people are in it, that sort of thing. Well, the
club has, at different times, between 1,000 and 2,000 members. And all kinds of
people are in the club. Very young children, adults of many years are in it. And
all kinds of interests and professions are in it. But we do have in common some
effects for Oz or the creation or idea of it. Many of us are collecting the
books, and many just simply want reading copies. Others want to build fine
collections. Some have other interests, such as the 1939 movie and finding all
kinds of memorabilia concerning it. There's all kinds of ways to build an Oz
collection. But we get together and we talk over the books and what we like
best. We have quizzes over the books. We collect the old films. And there were,
L. Frank Baum had an Oz film company in 1915. And we collect some of the films
made then, 14, 15. Some films are silent, of course, but it's interesting to see
how he thought an Oz film should be made. And we do all kinds of things. Sing
some of the songs from the stage plays.
Discuss how to identify the different editions.
Well, I guess generally just it's a mutual interest organization. And help each
other find the books we need and so on.
So there's a whole subculture of people who collect Oz memorabilia as well as
are just interested in Oz. Well, yes, there are quite a few collectors to this.
I'm sure there are many more people collected than just the ones in the club.
But we do seem to enjoy each other's company and showing our mutual interest.
Where do people find the old books? I happen to be a book collector myself.
Nothing quite this esoteric. But I would think some of the first editions of Oz
would be pretty rare and pretty hard to come by. Do people pull them out of
their attic sometimes or find them at a garage sale or whatever and everybody
celebrates? Very much like that. They're, of course, where you find them. But
sometimes someone will clean out an attic and find in a box that there's some
old Oz books that somebody put away years ago. And they or no one in the family
has interest in them. And they do sell them. Sometimes you get them from the
book dealer. Oftentimes it's just the fun of finding them, searching them out.
And it's, well, like building your own yellow brick road, I guess. You first
start out with reading copies. You want better copies. You have to have first
editions. And there's just no end to it.
There are also, as my understanding, I guess, Oz toys, dolls of the characters
and models and that sort of thing. Where did they, were those just toys or were
they cereal box prizes or where did they pop up through the years? Well, there
were quite a few things that came out in connection with the 1939 film. And
apparently a lot more came out about the time of the Wiz stage play. A lot of
more Oz things. Oftentimes they are in connection with the film or some stage
play rather than just the books themselves. There have been a few things in
connection with the books, such as a board game, which is like a map of the land
of Oz. You advance down the yellow brick road by turn. But most of the things
are in connection with the 39 movie or some other dramatization.
Well, there's all kinds of things. There's dolls, there's clothes, there's
dishes.
There's no end to it. As a matter of fact, that's one of the projects the club
is doing now, trying to catalog one of these things. But we are not nearly
finished doing it. Is the interest in Oz cyclical or it comes and goes? Or has
it been pretty steady over the years? Well, in my own association with the club,
it's been fairly steady. Not everyone is knowing about the club. But there's
always been a core group that has been interested in it. And while membership
doesn't always stay consistent, each year people have to renew their membership
if they want to keep it up. It's been fairly constant.
Are reprints of Baum's work, the ones I'm specifically talking here now, are the
Ballantyne paperback releases? Are those abridged in any manner? Are they
straight thing? I think they're straight books. I don't think they're abridged
in any way. I'd say that without it. I don't believe I've examined them that
closely. But as far as I know, they are careful reprints. One thing that
impressed me about those particular reprints is the front covers are paintings
based on the, I guess in all cases, but one, the Neal drawings from the
interior. And I'm not that much of an expert, but my daughter really likes them.
She can look at the cover and pick out who everybody is. And they're really
nice. They're not abstract and they're not changed from the way the books are.
Have you looked at the covers that closely on these new ones? Well, yes, they're
very bright and colorful. They are attractive.
People that are Oz fans, do they, can you generalize in any way, do they have
any other interests in the world of fantasy per se? Well, many of them do have
other interests. They collect more things than just the Oz books. That's true. I
don't know whether they all do or not. I don't suppose they do. I don't know all
the club members personally. But I probably know more than any other person.
But, yes, many of them have other interests. Some just like children's books in
general. Others will have something entirely different that they're collecting,
but they'll have another set of things besides Oz things.
When somebody writes a book in the Oz series, is it cleared with the club as far
as being in the kind of joining the fold of the Oz series? Or is this something
that's just kind of unofficial? Somebody writes a book and it either is accepted
or not. Is there anything official there? No, there's nothing official. The club
has no authority to do anything like that. The club has published some Oz books,
but we've done it with the commission of the publisher who published the series.
And I don't think we would publish one unless the publisher agreed that we
could.
In my research, the name that I came across quite often was Ruth Plumlee
Thompson, who apparently wrote Oz books from, what, 1921 to 1939. How many did
she end up writing? She wrote 19 books for the series. And then she wrote a
couple of others, which is club published, which are not part of the series, but
they're her books, though, just the same. And she wrote five other books that
aren't about Oz, one of which was published by John Arneal called The Curious
Cruise of Captain Santa, which is quite a collector's item to mind. She was a
very delightful lady. I met her several times. And she lived until 1976. So, of
course, she hasn't gone too long now. But she was totally unpredictable, very
much like one of her own characters. Absolutely delightful. Very witty. And
very, very intelligent lady. And just never knew what she would say next, what
she would do.
Does the Oz fan club have annual conventions? Yes. We like to pretend that the
United States, like the land of Oz, divided up into several regions or parts, so
that when we hold one on the east coast, we remember that the Munchkins lived in
the east part of Oz, so that's a Munchkin convention. And let me hold one in the
western part of the United States, though. That's where the Winkies lived in Oz.
So we have a Winkie convention out in California. And so we divide up the
country by something like that. We hold four or five conventions a year and have
several smaller ones rather than a very large one. It's easier to get to, more
local ones, I suppose. I try to get to most of them myself, though not everybody
else does.
I would think you have the ideal profession for something like this because
you're off some in the summer and can spend time with your hobby. I guess this
is really more than a hobby, but at least you get a chance to have some free
time to do it. Yes, that is true. Most conventions are held in the summer when
it is possible for them to get to. And that's one reason I've been able to
attend them. Well, I enjoy doing it. It sort of helps hold the club together a
little bit, I guess.
How often do you reread the various books? Well, I'm looking into them
constantly for various points and research and so on. To sit down and read them,
it's probably been some time. I find I recall them fairly well, however, because
I'm working with Oz most of the time. But it's some of the books I haven't read
for some time.
If one of our listeners wanted to join the International Wizard of Oz fan club,
what should they do? Well, they could write to me as a climate secretary. Part
of my job is to tell people about the club and enroll members. Would you like my
address then? Sure, that would be fine. Uh-huh. All right. My name is Fred
Meyer, M-E-Y-E-R, and I live at 220 North 11th Street in Escanaba, Michigan.
Escanaba spelled E-S-C-A-N-A-B-A, Michigan, 49829.
I guess Escanaba gets spelled a lot of ways through the years. Occasionally it's
Oscanaba, but I get the letters anyway. Would you have any objection? I don't
know what our syndicators think. I'll have to ask them, but if we put the
address on the air, would that be okay? That would be all right with me, yes.
All right. Well, sir, I enjoyed very much finding out about the Wizard of Oz fan
club. The series, as I mentioned to you, my daughter and I have read it. We're
on number nine now, and it's just delightful. And probably whenever we finish
it, I'll start reading it to my son, who's a little younger. And you may have
some converts here. Well, it's been a pleasure to talk to you. But we sure
appreciate your talking to us, and lots of luck on finding those collector's
items. I'm a book collector, and if I see anything, I'll let you know. I
appreciate that. I don't know how much Oz material made it out to West Texas,
but I get around a little bit. And now I'll keep an eye out for it. I've never
really noticed it before. I'm sure I just have overlooked it. And so I've
discovered something myself here. Good. Well, great. Again, it's a pleasure
talking to you. We sure appreciate it. Well, I've enjoyed it. Great. Okay. Take
care now. Yeah. Talk to you later, I'm sure. Bye-bye now. Bye. Bye.